[Substrate.io Migration] Glossary (#3)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: polkadot-protocol/introduction/glossary.md

- [Polkadot SDK Glossary](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/glossary/index.html){target=\_blank}

## Authority

The role in a blockchain that can participate in consensus mechanisms. 

- [GRANDPA](#grandpa) - the authorities vote on chains they consider final 
- [Blind Assignment of Blockchain Extension](#blind-assignment-of-blockchain-extension-babe) (BABE) - the authorities are also [block authors](#block-author) 

Authority sets can be used as a basis for consensus mechanisms such as the [Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS)](#nominated-proof-of-stake-npos) protocol.

## Authority Round (Aura)

A deterministic [consensus](#consensus) protocol where block production is limited to a rotating list of [authorities](#authority) that take turns creating blocks. In authority round (Aura) consensus, most online authorities are assumed to be honest. It is often used in combination with [GRANDPA](#grandpa) as a [hybrid consensus](#hybrid-consensus) protocol.

Learn more by reading the official [Aura consensus algorithm](https://openethereum.github.io/Aura){target=\_blank} wiki article.

## Blind Assignment of Blockchain Extension (BABE)

> A [block authoring](#block-author) protocol similar to [Aura](#aura), except [authorities](#authority) win [slots](#slot) based on a Verifiable Random Function (VRF) instead of the round-robin selection method. The winning authority can select a chain and submit a new block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [block authoring](#block-author) protocol similar to [Aura](#authority-round-aura), except [authorities](#authority) win [slots](#slot) based on a Verifiable Random Function (VRF) instead of the round-robin selection method. The winning authority can select a chain and submit a new block.
```

Learn more by reading the official Web3 Foundation [BABE research document](https://research.web3.foundation/Polkadot/protocols/block-production/Babe){target=\_blank}.

## Block Author

The node responsible for the creation of a block, also called _block producers_. In a Proof of Work (PoW) blockchain, these nodes are called _miners_.

## Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT)

> The ability of a distributed computer network to remain operational if a certain proportion of its [nodes](#node) or [authorities](#authority) are defective or behaving maliciously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ability of a distributed computer network to remain operational if a certain proportion of its nodes or [authorities](#authority) are defective or behaving maliciously.
```

## Consensus

Consensus is the process blockchain nodes use to agree on a chain's canonical fork. It is composed of [authorship](#block-author), finality, and [fork-choice rule](#fork-choice-rulestrategy). In the Polkadot ecosystem, these three components are usually separate and the term consensus often refers specifically to authorship.

See also [hybrid consensus](#hybrid-consensus).

## Consensus Algorithm

Ensures a set of [actors](#authority)—who don't necessarily trust each other—can reach an agreement about the state as the result of some computation. Most consensus algorithms assume that up to one-third of the actors or nodes can be [Byzantine fault tolerant](#byzantine-fault-tolerance-bft).

Consensus algorithms are generally concerned with ensuring two properties:

- **Safety** - indicating that all honest nodes eventually agreed on the state of the chain
- **Liveness** - indicating the ability of the chain to keep progressing

## Consensus Engine

The node subsystem responsible for consensus tasks.

> For detailed information about the consensus strategies of the [Polkadot network](#polkadot-network), see the [Polkadot Consensus](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-consensus){target=\_blank} blog series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For detailed information about the consensus strategies of the [Polkadot](#polkadot) network, see the [Polkadot Consensus](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-consensus){target=\_blank} blog series.
```

Well-known development accounts, such as Alice, Bob, Charlie, Dave, Eve, and Ferdie, are generated from the same secret phrase:

```
bottom drive obey lake curtain smoke basket hold race lonely fit walk
```

Many tools in the Polkadot SDK ecosystem, such as [`subkey`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/HEAD/substrate/bin/utils/subkey){target=\_blank}, allow you to implicitly specify an account using a derivation path such as `//Alice`.

## Digest

An extensible field of the [block header](#header) that encodes information needed by several actors in a blockchain network, including:

- [Light clients](#light-client) for chain synchronization
- Consensus engines for block verification
- The runtime itself, in the case of pre-runtime digests

## Dispatchable

Function objects that act as the entry points in FRAME [pallets](#pallet). Internal or external entities can call them to interact with the blockchain’s state. They are a core aspect of the runtime logic, handling [transactions](#transaction) and other state-changing operations.

## Events

A means of recording that some particular [state](#state) transition happened.

> In the context of [FRAME](#frame), events are composable data types that each [pallet](#pallet) can individually define. Events in FRAME are implemented as a set of transient storage items inspected immediately after a block has been executed and reset during block initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of [FRAME](#frame-framework-for-runtime-aggregation-of-modularized-entities), events are composable data types that each [pallet](#pallet) can individually define. Events in FRAME are implemented as a set of transient storage items inspected immediately after a block has been executed and reset during block initialization.
```

## Genesis Configuration

A mechanism for specifying the initial state of a blockchain. By convention, this initial state or first block is commonly referred to as the genesis state or genesis block. The genesis configuration for Polkadot SDK-based chains is accomplished by way of a [chain specification](#chain-specification) file.

## GRANDPA

A deterministic finality mechanism for blockchains that is implemented in the [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank} programming language.

The [formal specification](https://github.com/w3f/consensus/blob/master/pdf/grandpa-old.pdf){target=\_blank} is maintained by the [Web3 Foundation](https://web3.foundation/){target=\_blank}.

## Header

A structure that aggregates the information used to summarize a block. Primarily, it consists of cryptographic information used by [light clients](#light-client) to get minimally secure but very efficient chain synchronization.

## Hybrid Consensus

A blockchain consensus protocol that consists of independent or loosely coupled mechanisms for [block production](#block-author) and finality.

> Hybrid consensus allows the chain to grow as fast as probabilistic consensus protocols, such as [Aura](#authority-round-aura), while maintaining the same level of security as [deterministic finality](#deterministic-finality) consensus protocols, such as [GRANDPA](#grandpa).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hybrid consensus allows the chain to grow as fast as probabilistic consensus protocols, such as [Aura](#authority-round-aura), while maintaining the same level of security as deterministic finality consensus protocols, such as [GRANDPA](#grandpa).
```

## Inherent Transactions

A special type of unsigned transaction, referred to as _inherents_, that enables a block authoring node to insert information that doesn't require validation directly into a block.

Only the block-authoring node that calls the inherent transaction function can insert data into its block. In general, validators assume the data inserted using an inherent transaction is valid and reasonable even if it can't be deterministically verified.

## JSON-RPC

A stateless, lightweight remote procedure call protocol encoded in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). JSON-RPC provides a standard way to call functions on a remote system by using JSON.

For Polkadot SDK, this protocol is implemented through the [Parity JSON-RPC](https://github.com/paritytech/jsonrpc){target=\_blank} crate.

## Keystore

A subsystem for managing keys for the purpose of producing new blocks.

## Kusama

> [Kusama](https://kusama.network/){target=\_blank} is a Polkadot SDK-based blockchain that implements a design similar to the [Polkadot network](#polkadot-network).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Kusama](https://kusama.network/){target=\_blank} is a Polkadot SDK-based blockchain that implements a design similar to the [Polkadot](#polkadot) network.
```

Polkadot SDK uses the [Rust implementation](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p){target=\_blank} of the `libp2p` networking stack.

## Light Client

A type of blockchain node that doesn't store the [chain state](#state) or produce blocks.

A light client can verify cryptographic primitives and provides a [remote procedure call (RPC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call){target=\_blank} server, enabling blockchain users to interact with the network.

## Metadata

Data that provides information about one or more aspects of a system.
The metadata that exposes information about a Polkadot SDK blockchain enables you to interact with that system.

## Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS)

A method for determining [validators](#validator) or _[authorities](#authority)_ based on a willingness to commit their stake to the proper functioning of one or more block-producing nodes.

## Oracle

An entity that connects a blockchain to a non-blockchain data source. Oracles enable the blockchain to access and act upon information from existing data sources and incorporate data from non-blockchain systems and services.

## Origin

> A [FRAME](#frame) primitive that identifies the source of a [dispatched](#dispatchable) function call into the [runtime](#runtime). The FRAME System pallet defines three built-in [origins](#origin). As a [pallet](#pallet) developer, you can also define custom origins, such as those defined by the [Collective pallet](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/pallet_collective/enum.RawOrigin.html){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [FRAME](#frame-framework-for-runtime-aggregation-of-modularized-entities) primitive that identifies the source of a [dispatched](#dispatchable) function call into the [runtime](#runtime). The FRAME System pallet defines three built-in [origins](#origin). As a [pallet](#pallet) developer, you can also define custom origins, such as those defined by the [Collective pallet](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/pallet_collective/enum.RawOrigin.html){target=\_blank}.
```

## Pallet

> A module that can be used to extend the capabilities of a [FRAME](#frame)-based [runtime](#runtime).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A module that can be used to extend the capabilities of a [FRAME](#frame-framework-for-runtime-aggregation-of-modularized-entities)-based [runtime](#runtime).
```

> Pallets bundle domain-specific logic with runtime primitives like [events](#event) and [storage items](#storage-item).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pallets bundle domain-specific logic with runtime primitives like [events](#events) and [storage items](#storage-item).
```

## Parachain

A parachain is a blockchain that derives shared infrastructure and security from a _[relay chain](#relay-chain)_.
You can learn more about parachains on the [Polkadot Wiki](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/learn-parachains){target=\_blank}.

## Paseo

Paseo TestNet provisions testing on Polkadot's "production" runtime, which means less chance of feature or code mismatch when developing parachain apps. Specifically, after the [Polkadot Technical fellowship](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-polkadot-technical-fellowship){target=\_blank} proposes a runtime upgrade for Polkadot, this TestNet is updated, giving a period where the TestNet will be ahead of Polkadot to allow for testing.

> ## Polkadot Network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Polkadot
```

We don't use network for the other networks listed on this page, so might as well remove it from here

The [Polkadot network](https://polkadot.network/){target=\_blank} is a blockchain that serves as the central hub of a heterogeneous blockchain network. It serves the role of the [relay chain](#relay-chain) and provides shared infrastructure and security to support [parachains](#parachain).

## Relay Chain

> Relay chains are [blockchains](#blockchain) that provide shared infrastructure and security to the [parachains](#parachain) in the network. In addition to providing [consensus](#consensus) capabilities, relay chains allow parachains to communicate and exchange digital assets without needing to trust one another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relay chains are blockchains that provide shared infrastructure and security to the [parachains](#parachain) in the network. In addition to providing [consensus](#consensus) capabilities, relay chains allow parachains to communicate and exchange digital assets without needing to trust one another.
```

## Rococo

A [parachain](#parachain) test network for the Polkadot network. The [Rococo](#rococo) network is a Polkadot SDK-based blockchain with an October 14, 2024 deprecation date. Development teams are encouraged to use the Paseo TestNet instead.

## Runtime

> The runtime provides the [state transition function](#state-transition-function-stf) for a node. In Polkadot SDK, the runtime is stored as a [Wasm](#webassembly-wasm) binary in the [chain state](#state).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The runtime provides the [state transition function](#state-transition-function-stf) for a node. In Polkadot SDK, the runtime is stored as a [Wasm](#webassembly-wasm) binary in the chain state.
```

## Slot

> A fixed, equal interval of time used by consensus engines such as [Aura](#aura-aka-authority-round) and [BABE](#blind-assignment-of-blockchain-extension-babe). In each slot, a subset of [authorities](#authority) is permitted, or obliged, to [author](#block-author) a block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A fixed, equal interval of time used by consensus engines such as [Aura](#authority-round-aura) and [BABE](#blind-assignment-of-blockchain-extension-babe). In each slot, a subset of [authorities](#authority) is permitted, or obliged, to [author](#block-author) a block.
```

The sovereign account for each chain is a root-level account that can only be accessed using the Sudo pallet or through governance. The account identifier is calculated by concatenating the Blake2 hash of a specific text string and the registered parachain identifier.

## SS58 Address Format

A public key address based on the Bitcoin [`Base-58-check`](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Base58Check_encoding){target=\_blank} encoding. Each Polkadot SDK SS58 address uses a `base-58` encoded value to identify a specific account on a specific Polkadot SDK-based chain

The [canonical `ss58-registry`](https://github.com/paritytech/ss58-registry){target=\_blank} provides additional details about the address format used by different Polkadot SDK-based chains, including the network prefix and website used for different networks

## State Transition Function (STF)

The logic of a blockchain that determines how the state changes when a block is processed. In Polkadot SDK, the state transition function is effectively equivalent to the [runtime](#runtime).

## Storage Item

> [FRAME](#frame) primitives that provide type-safe data persistence capabilities to the [runtime](#runtime).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[FRAME](#frame-framework-for-runtime-aggregation-of-modularized-entities) primitives that provide type-safe data persistence capabilities to the [runtime](#runtime).
```

Learn more in the [storage items](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/storage/types/index.html){target=\_blank} reference document in the Polkadot SDK.

## Substrate

> A flexible framework for building modular, efficient, and upgradeable [blockchains](#blockchain). Substrate is written in the [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank} programming language and is maintained by [Parity Technologies](https://www.parity.io/){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A flexible framework for building modular, efficient, and upgradeable blockchains. Substrate is written in the [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank} programming language and is maintained by [Parity Technologies](https://www.parity.io/){target=\_blank}.
```

## WebAssembly (Wasm)

An execution architecture that allows for the efficient, platform-neutral expression of
deterministic, machine-executable logic.

[Wasm](https://webassembly.org/){target=\_blank} can be compiled from many languages, including
the [Rust](http://rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank} programming language. Polkadot SDK-based chains use a Wasm binary to provide portable [runtimes](#runtime) that can be included as part of the chain's state.

## Weight

A convention used in Polkadot SDK-based blockchains to measure and manage the time it takes to validate a block.
Polkadot SDK defines one unit of weight as one picosecond of execution time on reference hardware.

The maximum block weight should be equivalent to one-third of the target block time with an allocation of one-third each for:

- Block construction
- Network propagation
- Import and verification

By defining weights, you can trade-off the number of transactions per second and the hardware required to maintain the target block time appropriate for your use case. Weights are defined in the runtime, meaning you can tune them using runtime updates to keep up with hardware and software improvements.

## Westend

> Westend is a Parity-maintained, Polkadot SDK-based blockchain that serves as a test network for the [Polkadot network](#polkadot-network).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Westend is a Parity-maintained, Polkadot SDK-based blockchain that serves as a test network for the [Polkadot](#polkadot) network.
```

## Inherent Transactions

Inherent transactions, referred to as *inherents*, are a special type of unsigned transaction which enables a block authoring node to insert information that doesn't require validation directly to a block.

Only the block-authoring node that calls the inherent transaction function can insert data into its block. In general, validators assume the data inserted using an inherent transaction is valid and reasonable even if it can't be deterministically verified.

## JSON-RPC

A stateless, lightweight remote procedure call protocol encoded in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). JSON-RPC provides a standard way to call functions on a remote system by using JSON.

For Polkadot SDK, this protocol is implemented through the [Parity JSON-RPC](https://github.com/paritytech/jsonrpc){target=\_blank} crate.

## Keystore

A subsystem for managing keys for the purpose of producing new blocks.

## Kusama

[Kusama](https://kusama.network/){target=\_blank} is a Substrate-based blockchain that implements a design similar to the [Polkadot network](#polkadot-network).

> Kusama is a [canary](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/canary_in_a_coal_mine){target=\_blank} network and is referred to as [Polkadot's "wild cousin"](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-comparisons-kusama){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer: I don't love this but the period does belong inside the quotes 🤷‍♀️

As a canary network, Kusama is expected to be more stable than a test network like [Westend](#westend) but less stable than a production network like [Polkadot](#polkadot). Kusama is controlled by its network participants and is intended to be stable enough to encourage meaningful experimentation.

## libp2p

> A peer-to-peer networking stack that allows use of many transport mechanisms, including WebSockets (usable in a web browser).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A peer-to-peer networking stack that allows the use of many transport mechanisms, including WebSockets (usable in a web browser).
```

Substrate uses the [Rust implementation](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p){target=\_blank} of the `libp2p` networking stack.

## Light Client

A type of blockchain node that doesn't store the [chain state](#state) or produce blocks.

> A light client can verify cryptographic primitives and exposes a [remote procedure call (RPC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call){target=\_blank} server that allows blockchain users to interact with the blockchain network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A light client can verify cryptographic primitives and provides a [remote procedure call (RPC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call){target=\_blank} server, enabling blockchain users to interact with the network.
```

## Metadata

Data that provides information about one or more aspects of a system.
The metadata that exposes information about a Substrate blockchain enables you to interact with that system.

## Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS)

A method for determining [validators](#validator) or _[authorities](#authority)_ based on a willingness to commit their stake to the proper functioning of one or more block-producing nodes.

## Oracle

> In a blockchain network, an oracle connects the blockchain to a non-blockchain data source. Oracles enable the blockchain to access and act upon information from existing data sources and incorporate data from non-blockchain systems and services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An entity that connects a blockchain to a non-blockchain data source. Oracles enable the blockchain to access and act upon information from existing data sources and incorporate data from non-blockchain systems and services.
```

Pallets bundle domain-specific logic with runtime primitives like [events](#event) and [storage items](#storage-item).

## Paseo

Paseo TestNet provisions testing on Polkadot's "production" runtime, which means less chance of feature or code mismatch when developing parachain apps. Specifically, after the [Polkadot Technical fellowship](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-polkadot-technical-fellowship){target=\_blank} proposes a runtime upgrade for Polkadot, this TestNet is updated, giving a period where the TestNet will be ahead of Polkadot to allow for testing.

## Parachain

A parachain is a blockchain that derives shared infrastructure and security from a _[relay chain](#relay-chain)_.
You can learn more about parachains on the [Polkadot Wiki](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/learn-parachains){target=\_blank}.

## Polkadot Network

The [Polkadot network](https://polkadot.network/){target=\_blank} is a blockchain that serves as the central hub of a heterogeneous blockchain network. It serves the role of the [relay chain](#relay-chain) and provides shared infrastructure and security to support [parachains](#parachain).

## Relay Chain

> Relay chains are [blockchains](#blockchain) that provide shared infrastructure and security to the [parachains](#parachain) in the network. In addition to providing [consensus](#consensus) capabilities, relay chains also allow parachains to communicate and exchange digital assets without needing to trust one another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relay chains are [blockchains](#blockchain) that provide shared infrastructure and security to the [parachains](#parachain) in the network. In addition to providing [consensus](#consensus) capabilities, relay chains allow parachains to communicate and exchange digital assets without needing to trust one another.
```

## Rococo

> A [parachain](#parachain) test network for the Polkadot network. The [Rococo](#rococo) network is a Substrate-based blockchain that is an evolving testbed for the capabilities of heterogeneous blockchain networks.

Reviewer: We should add a note that it's getting deprecated and probably update the definition since it will no longer be "evolving" haha

## Runtime

The runtime provides the [state transition function](#state-transition-function-stf) for a node. In Substrate, the runtime is stored as a [Wasm](#webassembly-wasm) binary in the [chain state](#state).

## Slot

A fixed, equal interval of time used by consensus engines such as [Aura](#aura-aka-authority-round) and [BABE](#blind-assignment-of-blockchain-extension-babe). In each slot, a subset of [authorities](#authority) is permitted, or obliged, to [author](#block-author) a block.

## Sovereign Account

> The unique account identifier for each chain in the relay chain ecosystem. It is often used in the context of cross-consensus (XCM) interactions to sign XCM messages sent to the relay chain or other chains in the ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unique account identifier for each chain in the relay chain ecosystem. It is often used in cross-consensus (XCM) interactions to sign XCM messages sent to the relay chain or other chains in the ecosystem.
```

The sovereign account for each chain is a root-level account that can only be accessed using the Sudo pallet or through governance. The account identifier is calculated by concatenating the Blake2 hash of a specific text string and the registered parachain identifier.

## SS58 Address Format

A public key address based on the Bitcoin [`Base-58-check`](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Base58Check_encoding){target=\_blank} encoding.

- Each Substrate SS58 address uses a `base-58` encoded value to identify a specific account on a specific Substrate-based chain
- These are represented by a `base-58` encoded value to identify a specific account on a specific Substrate chain

> - The [canonical `ss58-registry`](https://github.com/paritytech/ss58-registry){target=\_blank} provides additional details about the address format used by different Substrate-based chains, including the network prefix and website used for different networks

Reviewer: This doesn't feel like it should be in list format

## State Transition Function (STF)

The logic of a blockchain that determines how the state changes when a block is processed. In Substrate, the state transition function is effectively equivalent to the [runtime](#runtime).

## Storage Item

[FRAME](#frame) primitives that provide type-safe data persistence capabilities to the [runtime](#runtime).
Learn more in the [storage items](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/storage/types/index.html){target=\_blank} reference document in the Polkadot SDK.

## Substrate

> A flexible framework for building modular, efficient, and upgradeable [blockchains](#blockchain). Substrate is written in the [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank} programming language and is
> maintained by [Parity Technologies](https://www.parity.io/){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A flexible framework for building modular, efficient, and upgradeable [blockchains](#blockchain). Substrate is written in the [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank} programming language and is maintained by [Parity Technologies](https://www.parity.io/){target=\_blank}.
```

## Transaction

An [extrinsic](#extrinsic) that includes a signature that can be used to verify the account authorizing it inherently or via [signed extensions](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/signed_extensions/index.html){target=\_blank}.

## Transaction Era

> A definable period, expressed as a range of block numbers, during which a transaction can be included in a block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A definable period expressed as a range of block numbers during which a transaction can be included in a block.
```

> Transaction eras are used to protect against transaction replay attacks in the event that an account is reaped and its replay-protecting nonce is reset to zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transaction eras are used to protect against transaction replay attacks if an account is reaped and its replay-protecting nonce is reset to zero.
```

## Trie (Patricia Merkle Tree)

> A data structure that is used to represent sets of key-value pairs and enables the items in the data set to be stored and retrieved using a cryptographic hash. Because incremental changes to the data set result in a new hash, retrieving data is efficient even if the data set is very large. With this data structure, you can also prove whether the data set includes any particular key-value pair without access to the entire data set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A data structure used to represent sets of key-value pairs and enables the items in the data set to be stored and retrieved using a cryptographic hash. Because incremental changes to the data set result in a new hash, retrieving data is efficient even if the data set is very large. With this data structure, you can also prove whether the data set includes any particular key-value pair without access to the entire data set.
```

In Polkadot SDK-based blockchains, state is stored in a trie data structure that supports the efficient creation of incremental digests. This trie is exposed to the [runtime](#runtime) as [a simple key/value map](#storage-item) where both keys and values can be arbitrary byte arrays.

## Validator

A validator is a node that participates in the consensus mechanism of the network. Its roles include block production, transaction validation, network integrity, and security maintenance.

> ## Wasm (Wasm)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## WebAssembly (Wasm)
```

An execution architecture that allows for the efficient, platform-neutral expression of
deterministic, machine-executable logic.

[Wasm](https://webassembly.org/){target=\_blank} can be compiled from many languages, including
the [Rust](http://rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank} programming language. Substrate-based chains use a Wasm binary to provide portable [runtimes](#runtime) that can be included as part of the chain's state.

## Weight

A convention used in Substrate-based blockchains to measure and manage the time it takes to validate a block.
Substrate defines one unit of weight as one picosecond of execution time on reference hardware.

The maximum block weight should be equivalent to one-third of the target block time with an allocation of one-third each for:

- Block construction
- Network propagation
- Import and verification

> By defining weights, you can make trade-offs between the number of transactions per second and the hardware required to maintain the target block time appropriate for your use case. Weights are defined in the runtime, meaning you can tune them using runtime updates to keep up with hardware and software improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By defining weights, you can trade-off the number of transactions per second and the hardware required to maintain the target block time appropriate for your use case. Weights are defined in the runtime, meaning you can tune them using runtime updates to keep up with hardware and software improvements.
```

## Authority Round (Aura)

A deterministic [consensus](#consensus) protocol where block production is limited to a rotating list of [authorities](#authority) that take turns creating blocks.
With authority round (Aura) consensus, the majority of online authorities are assumed to be honest.

Learn more by reading [the official wiki article](https://openethereum.github.io/Aura){target=\_blank} for the Aura consensus algorithm.

The Aura protocol is often used in combination with [GRANDPA](#grandpa) as a [hybrid consensus](#hybrid-consensus) protocol where [Aura](#aura) is used for block production and short-term probabilistic finality, with deterministic finality provided by [GRANDPA](#grandpa).

## Blind Assignment of Blockchain Extension (BABE)

A [block authoring](#block-author) protocol similar to [Aura](#aura).

> However, with BABE (Blind Assignment of Blockchain Extension), [authorities](#authority) win [slots](#slot) based on a VRF (verifiable random function) as opposed to the round-robin selection method.

Author: @0xLucca How to handle edge cases like this, or is it fine to ignore?

## Consensus

In the context of a blockchain, consensus is the process nodes use to agree on the canonical fork of a chain.  Consensus is composed of [authorship](#block-author), finality, and [fork-choice rule](#fork-choice-rulestrategy).

In the Polkadot ecosystem, these are usually three components are separated from one another, and the term consensus often refers specifically to authorship.
In the context of a Substrate node, the term _consensus engine_ describes the node subsystem that is responsible for consensus tasks.

See also [hybrid consensus](#hybrid-consensus).

## Consensus Algorithm

An algorithm that ensures that a set of [actors](#authority)—who don't necessarily trust each other—can reach an agreement about the state as the result of some computation.
Most consensus algorithms assume that up to one-third of the actors or nodes can be [Byzantine fault tolerant](#byzantine-fault-tolerance-bft).

Consensus algorithms are generally concerned with ensuring two properties:

- **safety** - indicating that all honest nodes eventually agreed on the state of the chain

> - **liveness** - indicating the ability of the chain to keep progressing

Author: yes :p

---
title: Glossary
description: Glossary of terms used within the Polkadot ecosystem, Polkadot SDK, its subsequent libraries, and other relevant web3 terminology.  
---

This glossary defines and explains concepts and terminology specific to blockchain technology within the Polkadot ecosystem.

Other useful glossaries throughout the ecosystem can be found below:

- [Polkadot Wiki Glossary](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/glossary){target=\_blank}
- [Polkadot SDK Glossary](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/glossary/index.html){target=\_blank}

## Authority

> A generic term for the role in a blockchain that can participate in the consensus mechanisms. In [GRANDPA](#grandpa), the authorities vote on chains they consider final. In [BABE](#blind-assignment-of-blockchain-extension-babe), the authorities are [block authors](#block-author). Authority sets can be chosen to be mechanisms such as Polkadot's [Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS)](#nominated-proof-of-stake-npos) algorithm.

Reviewer 2: Please format acronyms as follows the first time they are used on a page:

Spell Out My Words (SOMW)

This is the pattern the rule looks for to satisfy the condition of introducing unfamiliar acronyms.

> A generic term for the role in a blockchain that can participate in the consensus mechanisms. In [GRANDPA](#grandpa), the authorities vote on chains they consider final. In [BABE](#blind-assignment-of-blockchain-extension-babe), the authorities are [block authors](#block-author). Authority sets can be chosen to be mechanisms such as Polkadot's [Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS)](#nominated-proof-of-stake-npos) algorithm.

Author: Clarified

## Authority Round (Aura)

A deterministic [consensus](#consensus) protocol where block production is limited to a rotating list of [authorities](#authority) that take turns creating blocks. With authority round (Aura) consensus, the majority of online authorities are assumed to be honest.

Learn more by reading [the official wiki article](https://openethereum.github.io/Aura){target=\_blank} for the Aura consensus algorithm.

The Aura protocol is often used in combination with [GRANDPA](#grandpa) as a [hybrid consensus](#hybrid-consensus) protocol where [Aura](#aura) is used for block production and short-term probabilistic finality, with deterministic finality provided by [GRANDPA](#grandpa).

## Blind Assignment of Blockchain Extension (BABE)

> A [block authoring](#block-author) protocol similar to [Aura](#aura). However, with BABE (Blind Assignment of Blockchain Extension), [authorities](#authority) win [slots](#slot) based on a VRF (verifiable random function) as opposed to the round-robin selection method. The winning authority can select a chain and submit a new block for it.

Reviewer 2: Please format acronyms as follows the first time they are used on a page:

Spell Out My Words (SOMW)

This is the pattern the rule looks for to satisfy the condition of introducing unfamiliar acronyms.

---
title: Glossary
description: Glossary of terms used within the Polkadot ecosystem.
---

This glossary defines and explains concepts and terminology specific to blockchain technology within the Polkadot ecosystem.

Other useful glossaries throughout the ecossytem can be found below:

- [Polkadot Wiki Glossary](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/glossary)
- [Polkadot SDK Glossary](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/glossary/index.html)

## Authority

An authority is a generic term for the role in a blockchain that can participate in the consensus mechanism(s). In [GRANDPA](#grandpa), the authorities vote on chains they consider final. In [BABE](#blind-assignment-of-blockchain-extension-babe), the authorities are [block authors](#block-author). Authority sets can be chosen to be mechanisms such as Polkadot's [NPoS](#nominated-proof-of-stake-npos) algorithm.

## Authority Round (Aura)

Deterministic [consensus](#consensus) protocol where [block](#block) production is limited to a rotating list of [authorities](#authority) that take turns creating blocks.

> With authority round (Aura) consensus, the majority of online authorities are assumed to be honest.

Author: Yes, probably from the formatting from the wiki / docs. Fixed

In the Substrate ecosystem, these three components are separated from one another, and the term consensus often refers specifically to authorship.
In the context of a Substrate [node](#node), the term **consensus engine** describes the node subsystem that is responsible for consensus tasks.

See also [hybrid consensus](#hybrid-consensus).

## Consensus Algorithm

An algorithm that ensures that a set of [actors](#authority)—who don't necessarily trust each other—can reach agreement about state as the result of some computation.
Most consensus algorithms assume that up to one-third of the actors or nodes can be [byzantine fault tolerant](#byzantine-fault-tolerance-bft).

Consensus algorithms are generately concerned with ensuring two properties:

- **safety** indicating that all honest nodes eventually agreed on the state of the chain.
- **liveness** indicating the ability for the chain to keep making progress.

For detailed information about the consensus strategies of the [Polkadot network](#polkadot-network), see the [Polkadot Consensus](https://polkadot.network/polkadot-consensus-part-1-introduction/) blog series.

See also [hybrid consensus](#hybrid-consensus).

## Collective

> Most often used to refer to an instance of the [Collective pallet](#collective) on Substrate-based networks such as [Kusama](#kusama) or [Polkadot](#polkadot) if the Collective pallet is part of the [FRAME](#frame)-based [runtime](#runtime) for the network.

Author: @0xLucca Haven't really looked at Vale stuff, but makes sense to add Kusama to the dictionary?

Events in FRAME are implemented as a set of transient storage items that are inspected immediately after a block has executed and reset during block-initialization.

## Executor

A means of executing a function call in a given [runtime](#runtime) with a set of dependencies.
There are two orchestration engines in Substrate, _WebAssembly_ and _native_.

- The _native executor_ uses a natively compiled runtime embedded in the [node](#node) to execute calls.
  This is a performance optimization that up-to-date nodes can take advantage of.

- The _WebAssembly executor_ uses a [Wasm](#webassembly-wasm) binary and a Wasm interpreter to execute calls.
  The binary is guaranteed to be up-to-date regardless of the version of the blockchain [node](#node) because it is persisted in the [state](#state) of the Substrate-based chain.

## Extrinsic

An extrinsic is a general term for a piece of data that is originated outside of the runtime, included into a block and leads to some action. This includes user-initiated transactions as well as inherents which are placed into the block by the block-builder.

> It is a SCALE encoded array typically consisting of a version number, signature, and varying data types indicating the resulting runtime function to be called. Extrinsics take two forms, "[inherents](#inherent-transactions)" and "[transactions](#transaction)". For more technical details see the [Polkadot spec](https://spec.polkadot.network/#id-extrinsics).

Reviewer 2: This is a valid flag. I would edit: 

Extrinsics take two forms, [`inherents`](#inherent-transactions) and [`transactions`](#transaction).

Accounts cannot be created with a balance less than the existential deposit amount.
If an account balance drops below this amount, the Balances pallet uses [a FRAME System API](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/frame_system/pallet/struct.Pallet.html#method.dec_ref) to drop its references to that account.
If all of the references to an account are dropped, the account can be [reaped](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/frame_system/pallet/struct.Pallet.html#method.allow_death).

## Fork Choice Rule/Strategy

A fork choice rule (or strategy) helps determine which chain is valid when reconciling amongst several forks within a network.  A common fork choice rule is the [longest chain](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_consensus/struct.LongestChain.html), which the chain with the highest number of blocks gets selected.

## FRAME

An acronym for the _Framework for Runtime Aggregation of Modularized Entities_ that enables developers to create blockchain [runtime](#runtime) environments from a modular set of components called [pallets](#pallet).  It utilizes a set of procedural macros to construct runtimes.

> [Visit the Polkadot SDK docs For more detail on FRAME.](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/frame_runtime/index.html)

Reviewer 2: To prevent this flag, the first time you use an acronym, format it this way: 

Spell Out My Words (SOMW) 

This is the pattern the rule looks for the first time it sees an acronym.

## Genesis Configuration

A mechanism for specifying the initial [state](#state) of a [blockchain](#blockchain).
By convention, this initial state or first block is commonly referred to as the **genesis state** or **genesis block**.
The genesis configuration for Substrate-based chains is accomplished by way of a [chain specification](#chain-specification) file.
The chain specification file makes it easy to use a single Substrate codebase as the foundation for multiple independently-configured chains.

## GRANDPA

A [deterministic finality](#deterministic-finality) mechanism for [blockchains](#blockchain) that is implemented in the [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) programming language.
The [formal specification](https://github.com/w3f/consensus/blob/master/pdf/grandpa-old.pdf) is
maintained by the [Web3 Foundation](https://web3.foundation/).

## Header

The structure that aggregates the information used to summarize a [block](#block).

> A header consists primarily of [cryptographic](#cryptographic-primitives) information that is used by [light clients](#light-client) to get a minimally-secure but very efficient

Reviewer: There is no definition for cryptographic primitives

synchronization of the chain.

## Hybrid Consensus

> A blockchain consensus protocol that consists of independent or loosely-coupled mechanisms for [block production](#block-author) and [finality](#finality).

Reviewer: There is no definition for finality

> Hybrid consensus allows the chain to grow as fast as probabilistic consensus protocols, such as [Aura](#aura-aka-authority-round), while maintaining the same level of security as [deterministic finality](#deterministic-finality) consensus protocols, such as [GRANDPA](#grandpa).

Reviewer: The aura link is incorrect

> Hybrid consensus allows the chain to grow as fast as probabilistic consensus protocols, such as [Aura](#aura-aka-authority-round), while maintaining the same level of security as [deterministic finality](#deterministic-finality) consensus protocols, such as [GRANDPA](#grandpa).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hybrid consensus allows the chain to grow as fast as probabilistic consensus protocols, such as [Aura](#aura-aka-authority-round) while maintaining the same level of security as [deterministic finality](#deterministic-finality) consensus protocols, such as [GRANDPA](#grandpa).
```

In general, block production algorithms tend to be faster than finality mechanisms.
Making block production separate from block finalization gives Substrate developers greater control of their chain's performance.

## Inherent Transactions

Inherent transactions—sometimes referred to as inherents—are a special type of unsigned transaction.
This type of transaction enables a block authoring node to insert information that doesn't require validation directly to a block.

> Only the block authoring node that calls the inherent transaction function can insert data into its block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only the block-authoring node that calls the inherent transaction function can insert data into its block.
```

In general, validators assume the data inserted using an inherent transaction is valid and reasonable even if it can't be deterministically verified.

## JSON-RPC

> A stateless, lightweight remote procedure call protocol that is encoded in JSON. JSON-RPC provides a standard way to call functions on a remote system by using JavaScript Object Notation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A stateless, lightweight remote procedure call protocol encoded in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). JSON-RPC provides a standard way to call functions on a remote system by using JSON.
```

Introduce the acronym first

A light client is capable of verifying [cryptographic primitives](#cryptographic-primitives) and exposes a [remote procedure call (RPC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call) server that allows blockchain users to interact with the blockchain network.

## Metadata

Data that provides information about one or more aspects of a system.
The metadata that exposes information about a Substrate [blockchain](#blockchain) enables you to interact with that system.

## Node

A running instance of a blockchain client.
Each node is part of the [peer-to-peer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer-to-peer) network that allows blockchain participants to interact with one another.
Substrate nodes can fill a number of roles in a blockchain network.
For example, the nodes that produce blocks fulfill the [validator](#validator) role for the blockchain.
Nodes that run [light-clients](#light-client) facilitate scalable interactions in resource-constrained environments like [user interfaces](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-connect) or embedded devices.

## Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS)

> A method for determining [validators](#validator) or _[authorities](#authority)_ based on a willingness to commit their stake to the proper functioning of one or more block producing nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A method for determining [validators](#validator) or _[authorities](#authority)_ based on a willingness to commit their stake to the proper functioning of one or more block-producing nodes.
```

## Oracle

> In a blockchain network, an oracle is a mechanism for connecting the blockchain to a non-blockchain data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a blockchain network, an oracle connects the blockchain to a non-blockchain data source.
```

Oracles enable the blockchain to access and act upon information from existing data sources and incorporate data from non-blockchain systems and services.

## Origin

A [FRAME](#frame) primitive that identifies the source of a [dispatched](#dispatchable) function call into the [runtime](#runtime).

> The FRAME `system` pallet defines three built-in [origins](#origin).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FRAME System pallet defines three built-in [origins](#origin).
```

When casually referring to a pallet, we do not need to wrap it in back ticks. Instead captialize the name of the pallet

As a [pallet](#pallet) developer, you can also define custom origins, such as those defined by the [Collective pallet](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/pallet_collective/enum.RawOrigin.html).

## Pallet

> A module that can be used to extend the capabilities of a [FRAME](#frame)-based [runtime](#runtime).
> Pallets bundle domain-specific logic with runtime primitives like [events](#event),
> and [storage items](#storage-items).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A module that can be used to extend the capabilities of a [FRAME](#frame)-based [runtime](#runtime).
Pallets bundle domain-specific logic with runtime primitives like [events](#event) and [storage items](#storage-item).
```

## Parachain

A parachain is a [blockchain](#blockchain) that derives shared infrastructure and security from a _[relay chain](#relay-chain)_.
You can learn more about parachains on the [Polkadot Wiki](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/learn-parachains).

## Polkadot network

The [Polkadot network](https://polkadot.network/) is a [blockchain](#blockchain) that serves as the central hub of a heterogeneous blockchain network.
It serves the role of the [relay chain](#relay-chain) and supports other chains—the [parachains](#parachain)—by providing shared infrastructure and security.

> ## Relay Chain

Author: @0xLucca Noticing it's triggering stuff on titles, where this is relevant

> The central hub in a heterogenous network of multiple blockchains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The central hub in a heterogeneous network of multiple blockchains.
```

Relay chains are [blockchains](#blockchain) that provide shared infrastructure and security to the other blockchains—the [parachains](#parachain)—in the network.
In addition to providing [consensus](#consensus) capabilities, relay chains also allow parachains to communicate and exchange digital assets without needing to trust one another.

> ## Rococo

Reviewer: Seeing this reminds me that perhaps we should have a definition for Paseo

A [parachain](#parachain) test network for the Polkadot network.
The Rococco network is a Substrate-based [blockchain](#blockchain) that is an evolving testbed for the capabilities of heterogeneous blockchain networks.

## Runtime

The block execution logic of a blockchain.
The runtime provides the [state transition function](#state-transition-function-stf) for a node.
In Substrate, the runtime is stored as a [WebAssembly](#webassembly-wasm) binary in the [chain state](#state).

## Slot

A fixed, equal interval of time used by consensus engines such as [Aura](#aura-aka-authority-round) and [BABE](#blind-assignment-of-blockchain-extension-babe).
In each slot, a subset of [authorities](#authority) is permitted—or obliged—to [author](#block-author) a [block](#block).

## Sovereign Account

The unique account identifier for each chain in the relay chain ecosystem. It is often used in the context of cross-consensus (XCM) interactions.

> The sovereign account for each chain is a root-level that can only be accessed using the Sudo pallet or through governance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sovereign account for each chain is a root-level account that can only be accessed using the Sudo pallet or through governance.
```

---
title: Glossary

> description: Glossary of terms used throughout the Polkadot ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Glossary of terms used within the Polkadot ecosystem.
```

---

> This glossary defines and explains concepts and terminology that are specific to blockchain technology or the Substrate ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This glossary defines and explains concepts and terminology specific to blockchain technology within the Polkadot ecosystem.
```

More details are found on the [Polkadot Collator Wiki](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-collator){target=\_blank}.

## Collective

> Most often used to refer to an instance of the [Collective pallet](#collective) on Polkadot SDK-based networks such as [Kusama](#kusama) or [Polkadot](#polkadot) if the Collective pallet is part of the [Framework for Runtime Aggregation of Modularized Entities](#frame-framework-for-runtime-aggregation-of-modularized-entities) (FRAME)-based [runtime](#runtime) for the network.

Reviewer 4: The `Collective pallet` link seems to be wrong because it points to Collective itself. Also, the first sentence feels too long.

> A council primarily serves to optimize and balance the more inclusive referendum system.

Reviewer 4: This sentence seems a little bit off because council was not mentioned before

- **Safety** - indicating that all honest nodes eventually agreed on the state of the chain
- **Liveness** - indicating the ability of the chain to keep progressing

## Consensus Engine

The node subsystem responsible for consensus tasks.

> For detailed information about the consensus strategies of the [Polkadot network](#polkadot-network), see the [Polkadot Consensus](https://polkadot.network/polkadot-consensus-part-1-introduction/){target=\_blank} blog series.

Reviewer 4: The link in `Polkadot Consensus` does not work

If the Balances pallet reference to an account is dropped, the account can be [reaped](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/frame_system/pallet/struct.Pallet.html#method.allow_death){target=\_blank}.

## Extrinsic

A general term for data that originates outside the runtime, is included in a block, and leads to some action. This includes user-initiated transactions and inherent transactions placed into the block by the block builder.

It is a SCALE-encoded array typically consisting of a version number, signature, and varying data types indicating the resulting runtime function to be called. Extrinsics can take two forms: [inherents](#inherent-transactions) and [transactions](#transaction). 

> For more technical details, see the [Polkadot spec](https://spec.polkadot.network/#id-extrinsics){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer 4: The link is wrong. It should be https://spec.polkadot.network/id-extrinsics

## Rococo

> A [parachain](#parachain) test network for the Polkadot network. The [Rococo](#rococo) network is a Substrate-based blockchain with an October 14, 2024 deprecation date. Development teams are encouraged to use the Paseo TestNet instead.

Reviewer 4: Polkadot SDK-based instead of Substrate
